doc: Documentation edits for 2.7.99-cs1 release (#17015)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/app_dev/device_guides/working_with_nrf/nrf54h/ug_nrf54h20_architecture_clockman.rst

Clock Domains
*************

The nRF54H20 SoC consists of the following clock domains:

* Low frequency clock (LFCLK)
* High-frequency oscillator (HFXO)
* FLL16M
* HSFLL Application
* HSFLL Radio
* HSFLL Secure
* HSFLL Global

Each clock domain is enabled independently of others and it is automatically enabled when at least one sink is active.
The firmware can choose to keep each clock domains enabled even when all its sinks are inactive.

Clock domain sources are selected by ``clock_control`` drivers based on the clock parameter requirements reported by the software modules using the ``clock_control`` functions.
These requirements may include clock frequency, accuracy, or precision.
Some clock domains are configured by ``clock_control`` drivers using ``LRCCONF`` peripherals, while others are configured with the assistance of the System Controller Firmware.

The application-facing APIs expose only the domain that directly clocks the component used by the application.
The management of the clocks on which this domain depends is handled internally by the clock driver associated with this domain.

> For example, a firmware module might request better timing accuracy for a fast UART instance.

Author: @hubertmis Could you check this?

> For example, a firmware module might request better timing accuracy for a fast UART instance.

Reviewer: Not sure. In IPS I can find a term "Fast clock domain", but nothing directly about peripherals. The "fast UART" is the one in the "fast clock domain".

In this case, the firmware module requests the accuracy from the global HSFLL device driver, which directly clocks the UART.
The dependencies, such as FLL16M and LFXO, are managed internally by the global HSFLL driver, not directly by the firmware module.

LFCLK
=====

The Low-Frequency Clock domain is responsible for generating a 32768 Hz clock signal for ultra-low-power peripherals like ``GRTC`` or ``RTC``.

HFXO
====

The high-frequency crystal oscillator domain is responsible for clocking peripherals requiring high accuracy and MHz range frequency.
The drawback of this clock source is relatively high power consumption so it is enabled only when needed.

Hardware capabilities
---------------------

The HFXO, like any other clock domain, can be connected in hardware to one of the available sources.
And it provides the clock signal to all of its sinks.

FLL16M
======

The FLL16M clock domain clocks most of the peripherals in the system ("slow", 16 MHz).

> Its accuracy results in the timing accuracy of slow ``UART``, ``SPI``, ``TWI``, ``PWM``, ``SAADC``, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Its accuracy results in the timing accuracy of slow ``UART``, ``SPI``, ``TWI``, ``PWM``, ``SAADC``, among others.
```

Local HSFLLs
============

Local HSFLLs are clocking CPUs in local domains, fast peripherals around them, and local RAM.

Global HSFLL
============

Global HSFLL clocks "fast" peripherals, FLPR, RAM, and MRAM blocks.

Zephyr clock control API
************************

Zephyr RTOS contains a ``clock_control`` device driver class for managing clocks.
The ``clock_control`` API is designed to support multiple requestors.
Moreover, the ``clock_control`` API supports blocking or asynchronous operations based on notifications when the requested clock settings are applied.

> The ``clock_control`` subsystem exposes portable parameters in its functions:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``clock_control`` subsystem exposes portable parameters in its functions, which include:
```

.. _ug_nrf54h20_architecture_clockman:

nRF54H20 Clock Management
#########################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

The nRF54H20 SoC consists of multiple asynchronous clock domains and requires clock sources for correct operation.
Each of the clock sources needs proper management:

* To start and stop the clock at the appropriate time.
* To select the proper clock source.
* To calibrate or synchronize the clock to a more accurate source.

Some of the clock management operations are performed solely by the hardware circuits, but others require software intervention.
Most of the clocks can be locked to other, more accurate ones to improve their accuracy.

Clock Domains
*************

The nRF54H20 SoC consists of the following clock domains:

* LFCLK
* HFXO
* FLL16M
* HSFLL Application
* HSFLL Radio (if Radio domain is present)
* HSFLL Secure
* HSFLL Global

Each clock domain is enabled independently of others and it is automatically enabled when at least one sink is active.
The firmware can choose to keep each clock domains enabled even when all its sinks are inactive.

Clock domain source selection differs between clock domains:

> * The LFCLK source is selected by the System Controller Firmware.
> * The HFXO source is selected by the System Controller Firmware.
> * The FLL16M source is selected by local domains or System Controller Firmware (SCFW) in all scenarios, except one:
>   When the firmware selects open-loop, but any of the HSFLL sources is in closed-loop, the FLL16M is automatically switched by the hardware to closed-loop.
> 
> * HSFLLs sources are selected by firmware (depending on an HSFLL instance: local domain or System Controller).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The LFCLK source is selected by the System Controller Firmware (SCFW).
* The HFXO source is selected by the SCFW.
* The FLL16M source is selected by local domains or SCFW in all scenarios, except when the firmware selects open-loop, but any of the HSFLL sources are in closed-loop, the FLL16M is automatically switched by the hardware to closed-loop.
* HSFLL sources are selected by firmware (depending on an HSFLL instance, which is local domain or System Controller).
```

> * HSFLLs sources are selected by firmware (depending on an HSFLL instance: local domain or System Controller).

Reviewer: I would rephrased this part to somethinkg like

"
Clock domain sources are selected by clock_control drivers based on the clock parameters' requirements reported by the software modules using the clock_control functions. The requirements may cover clock frequency, accuracy, or precision. Some clock domains are configured by clock_control drivers using LRCCONF peripherals, others are configured with assistance of the System Controller Firmware.
"

I'm not sure if more details is required in the public documentation.

The application-facing APIs expose only the domain that directly clocks the component used by the application.
The management of the clocks on which this domain depends is handled internally by the clock driver associated with this domain.

For example, a firmware module might request better timing accuracy for a fast UART instance.
In this case, the firmware module requests the accuracy from the global HSFLL device driver, which directly clocks the UART.
The dependencies, such as FLL16M and LFXO, are managed internally by the global HSFLL driver, not directly by the firmware module.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
extra line.

LFCLK
=====

The Low-Frequency Clock domain is responsible for generating a 32768 Hz clock signal for ultra-low-power peripherals like ``GRTC`` or ``RTC``.

HFXO
====

> The High-Frequency Crystal Oscillator domain is responsible for clocking peripherals requiring high accuracy and MHz range frequency.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The high-frequency crystal oscillator domain is responsible for clocking peripherals requiring high accuracy and MHz range frequency.
```

The drawback of this clock source is relatively high power consumption so it is enabled only when needed.

Hardware capabilities
---------------------

The HFXO, like any other clock domain, can be connected in hardware to one of the available sources.
And it provides the clock signal to all of its sinks.

FLL16M
======

The FLL16M clock domain clocks most of the peripherals in the system ("slow", 16 MHz).
Its accuracy results in the timing accuracy of slow ``UART``, ``SPI``, ``TWI``, ``PWM``, ``SAADC``, etc.

Local HSFLLs
============

Local HSFLLs are clocking CPUs in local domains, fast peripherals around them, and local RAM.

Global HSFLL
============

> Global HSFLL clocks "fast" peripherals, global CPUs, RAM, and MRAM blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Global HSFLL clocks "fast" peripherals, FLPR, RAM, and MRAM blocks.
```

I guess "global CPUs" is not a broadly understood term

Zephyr clock control API
************************

Zephyr RTOS contains a ``clock_control`` device driver class for managing clocks.
The ``clock_control`` API is designed to support multiple requestors.
Moreover, the ``clock_control`` API supports blocking or asynchronous operations based on notifications when the requested clock settings are applied.

> Because of this, the ``clock_control`` API is well-suited for LFCLK management in the local domains.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This sentence is a justification of the design decision. It doesn't provide user-related information.

The ``clock_control`` subsystem exposes portable parameters in its functions:

* Accuracy requests in ppm values

> * Precision requests in ppm over n cycles, period-period jitter, or (for simplicity) high- and low-precision modes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Precision requests in enumerated high- and low-precision modes
```

The non-architectural design of the driver selected this option

This policy applies to all clock parameters, including frequency and precision, following these criteria:

* The applied precision is at least as good as requested.
* The applied frequency is at least as fast as requested.
* All parameters are optimized for power consumption.

For more details, see the following links:

* :ref:`zephyr:clock_control_api`.
* The following calls in the `Zephyr's nRF clock control API extensions`_ (:file:`include/zephyr/drivers/clock_control/nrf_clock_control.h`):

  * ``nrf_clock_control_request()``: Requests a reservation to use a given clock with specified attributes.
  * ``nrf_clock_control_release()``: Releases a reserved use of a clock.
  * ``nrf_clock_control_cancel_or_release()``: Safely cancels a reservation request.

* The following calls in the `clocks devicetree macro API`_ (:file:`include/zephyr/devicetree/clocks.h`):

  * ``DT_CLOCKS_CTLR_BY_IDX()``: Gets the node identifier for the controller phandle from a *clocks* phandle-array property at an index.

>   * ``DT_CLOCKS_CTLR()``: It is equivalent to ``DT_CLOCKS_CTLR_BY_IDX()``.

Reviewer 4: `* ``DT_CLOCKS_CTLR()``: It is equivalent to ``DT_CLOCKS_CTLR_BY_IDX()`` with index (idx) set to 0.`
